
---

- [**Table of Contents**](#table-of-contents)
  - [**Project Objective**](#project-objective)
  - [**Partnership**](#partnership)
  - [**Introduction**](#introduction)
  - [**System Components**](#system-components)
    - [Computer Vision Algorithms](#computer-vision-algorithms)
    - [Vector Database, Indexing and Search](#vector-database-indexing-and-search)
    - [User Interface](#user-interface)
  - [**System Performance**](#system-performance)
    - [Accuracy](#accuracy)
    - [Runtime](#runtime)
  - [**Project Data Overview**](#project-data-overview)
    - [Main Directory](#main-directory)
    - [Subdirectory | models](#subdirectory--models)
    - [Subdirectory | query\_images](#subdirectory--query_images)
    - [Subdirectory | processed\_images](#subdirectory--processed_images)
    - [Subdirectory | reference\_dir](#subdirectory--reference_dir)
    - [Subdirectory | query\_dir](#subdirectory--query_dir)
    - [Key Data Files](#key-data-files)
  - [**Software Dependencies**](#software-dependencies)
  - [**How to Train and Use Giraffe Torso Detection Model?**](#how-to-train-and-use-giraffe-torso-detection-model)
  - [**How to Process a Labeled Batch of Images to be Used as Reference for Matching?**](#how-to-process-a-labeled-batch-of-images-to-be-used-as-reference-for-matching)
  - [**How to Process a Batch of Images to be Used as Query for Matching against Reference Data?**](#how-to-process-a-batch-of-images-to-be-used-as-query-for-matching-against-reference-data)
    - [Step 1: Upload a New Batch of Images](#step-1-upload-a-new-batch-of-images)
    - [Step 2: Create a Metadata Table](#step-2-create-a-metadata-table)
    - [Step 3: Execute the Program Using the User Interface](#step-3-execute-the-program-using-the-user-interface)
    - [Step 4: Monitor and Export Results](#step-4-monitor-and-export-results)
  - [**Default Hyperparameters and Configuration Settings**](#default-hyperparameters-and-configuration-settings)
  - [**Updates in Query Metadata File as Pipeline Progresses**](#updates-in-query-metadata-file-as-pipeline-progresses)
    - [Columns added after applying object detection models](#columns-added-after-applying-object-detection-models)
    - [Columns added after creating SIFT key points and descriptors](#columns-added-after-creating-sift-key-points-and-descriptors)
    - [Columns added after running re-identification matching solution](#columns-added-after-running-re-identification-matching-solution)
    - [Columns added after partitioning unknown items](#columns-added-after-partitioning-unknown-items)
    - [Columns added after evaluating accuracy metrics when labels available](#columns-added-after-evaluating-accuracy-metrics-when-labels-available)
    - [Columns added after expert reviews results and provide feedback](#columns-added-after-expert-reviews-results-and-provide-feedback)
    - [Columns added after updating reference database with processd query images](#columns-added-after-updating-reference-database-with-processd-query-images)
  - [**Licensing**](#licensing)

---

## **Project Objective**
This project aims to deliver a comprehensive, AI-powered giraffe photo re-identification tool tailored for both technical and non-technical users. Designed for scalability, it efficiently processes large datasets containing thousands of giraffe images with high accuracy. By automating key steps in catalog updates, the tool streamlines population tracking and enhances conservation efforts, supporting biodiversity research and the protection of giraffe populations in the wild.

## **Partnership**
This project was developed at the Microsoft AI for Good Lab in collaboration with Derek E. Lee, Ph.D., a quantitative ecologist and population biologist, and the Principal Scientist at the Wild Nature Institute (WNI).

## **Introduction**
 The pipeline can be used to manage a photo matching project from start to end and consists of the following components:

1. **Computer Vision Models to Process Images**: Perform giraffe segmentation and torso detection to only to remove unnecessary signals.
2. **Image Descriptor Creation**: Generate image key points and descriptors for each processed giraffe image.
3. **Re-identification Matching Algorithm**: Compare processed image descriptors against a reference dataset of previously identified giraffes to re-identify existing giraffes in the database.
4. **Unknown Items Partitioning Algorithm**: Compare batch of unknown processed giraffe images against itself to cluster photos from identical giraffes and label them uniquely.
5. **Human Expert Validation and Intervention**: Allow human experts to review and approve results generated by AI pipeline if necessary.
6. **Reference Dataset Update**: Automatically update the reference dataset with new matching results from the AI-powered pipeline.

While individual scripts can be run separately, we also provide a comprehensive **User Interface (UI)**. The UI allows users to access each module independently, visualize matching results, validate and provide feedback before updating the database. The UI runs each script via a button press within a tmux session, and logging is provided for monitoring both standard and error outputs. Non-technical users do not need to interact with the terminal. This interface can be seen as a batch query management platform for processing giraffe photos after each survey and data collection phase, enabling biodiversity research on population trends and survival rates.

The computer vision model focuses on the giraffe's torso, ensuring the central giraffe in the image is detected with minimal background interference for greater accuracy. The results are saved to build a reusable pool of processed files. Currently, we use **SIFT** (Scale-Invariant Feature Transform) for creating key points and descriptors used in matching algorithm, but the pipeline can easily be adapted to incorporate other representation models. **FAISS** (Facebook AI Similarity Search) is build based on normalized descriptor vectors and facilitate retrieving the nearest neighbors while running algorithms for re-identification and partitioning.

## **System Components**
### **Computer Vision Algorithms**
The following computer vision algorithms are used for data processing:

1. **Giraffe Segmentation**: In the first stage, we perform image segmentation using a pretrained **Detectron2** model, specifically the **COCO-InstanceSegmentation/mask_rcnn_R_50_FPN_3x.yaml** configuration and **model_final_f10217_segmentation** weights. This model segments the giraffe from the image and focuses on the central giraffe.

2. **Giraffe Torso Detection**: In the second stage, we fine-tune a pretrained **Detectron2** object detection model (**COCO-Detection/faster_rcnn_R_101_FPN_3x.yaml**) to detect giraffe torsos. We created torso annotations by matching cropped giraffe torso images from previous projects with central giraffes from the dataset provided by WNI. This customized model, **model_final_torso_detection.pth**, detects and segments the giraffe's torso.

3. **Reference Dataset Creation**: To run matching algorithms, we build a reference dataset consisting of all annotated giraffes, focusing on torso-only images with backgrounds removed. Each new query image is compared to this reference dataset using a **SIFT-based matching algorithm** where SIFT is used to create key points and descriptors for each image. If a match is found, the appropriate ID is assigned; otherwise, a new ID is generated, and the reference dataset is updated.

### **Similarity Search and Clustering of Vectors**
We use the **FAISS** library for efficient similarity search and image descriptor retrieval. The process of training the FAISS index based on `IndexHNSWFlat` on a reference dataset of **25,000 images** containing **~37M** descriptor vectors takes approximately **11 minutes**. Account for this overhead when planning your workflow.

### **User Interface**
The user interface (UI) is designed as a multi-functional tool to simplify image batch processing, large-scale visualization, and ensure that users with minimal technical skills can complete their giraffe photo matching project without interacting with the terminal. It covers all stages of the solution, providing a streamlined process from data upload to database updates. Additionally, the UI enables the validation and application of human expert feedback throughout the workflow. It is useful for both inference and validation when ground truth is available.

## **System Performance**
### **Accuracy**
In the giraffe re-identification task, we refer to existing giraffes in the query input batch as positive items and new giraffes as negative items. To evaluate re-identification accuracy, we compute standard binary classification metrics. Additionally, to assess performance on the subset of query data with re-identified labels, we report accuracy as accuracy_re_identified_items. To evaluate the partitioning accuracy of new, unknown giraffes, we use the Adjusted Rand Index, reported as adjusted_rand_index_partitioning in the table.

The results for the data split are shown below, where 15,965 images are used as reference data, 2,982 images are used as known query images and 1,734 are used as unknown query images.

| **Thresholds**            | **Value** | **Dataset Size**               | **Value** | **Confusion Matrix** | **Value** |
|:---------------------------------|:---------:|:-------------------------------|:---------:|:--------------------:|:---------:|
| dist_re_id            |   inf     | items_ in_ref             |  15,965   | TP                   |   2,894   |
| counts_re_id          |    10     | num_of_ queries        |  4,666    | TN                   |   1,467   |
| dist_ partitioning     |   0.06    | num_of_ pos_queries    |  2,932    | FP                   |     38    |
| counts_ partitioning   |     4     | num_of_ neg_queries    |  1,734    | FN                   |    267    |


| **Accuracy Metric**                  | **Value** |
|:------------------------------------|:---------:|
| precision_positive                  |   0.99    |
| recall_positive                     |   0.92    |
| f1_score_positive                   |   0.95    |
| precision_negative                  |   0.85    |
| recall_negative                     |   0.97    |
| f1_score_negative                   |   0.91    |
| overall_accuracy                    |   93%     |
| accuracy_re_identified_items        |   99%     |
| adjusted_rand_index_partitioning    |   0.80    |


### **Runtime**
On a Standard NC6s v3 Linux machine (6 vCPUs, 112 GiB RAM), the expected runtime for each step is show in table below.

| Process                                            | Time per Image       |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| Process and save image using object detection model | 1.7 sec              |
| Generate image key points and descriptors using SIFT              | 0.13 sec             |
| Training FAISS index on reference dataset          | 11 mins for ~26,000 images |
| Conduct query matching for re-identification using trained FAISS index   | 0.03 sec             |
| Conduct partitioning for unknown items by training a new FAISS index | 0.07 sec |
| Update database with existing items                | 0.0075 sec           |


Total compute time for processing and matching a sample dataset provided by Wild Nature Institute is:
- **Reference dataset (~26,000 images)**: 13 hours
- **Query dataset (~15,000 images)**: 8 hours

## **Project Data Overview**

### **Data**

```
data_root_directory/
|
|__ models/
|   |__ Base-RCNN-FPN.yaml
|   |__ faster_rcnn_R_101_FPN_3x.yaml
|   |__ mask_rcnn_R_50_FPN_3x.yaml
|   |__ config.yaml
|   |__ model_final_f10217_segmentation.pkl
|   |__ model_final_torso_detection.pth
|   |__ model_initial_torso_detection.pkl
|
|__ query_images/
|   |__ image1.jpg
|   |__ image2.jpg
|   |__ ...
|
|__ query_dir/
|   |__ metadata_query.csv
|   |__ giraffes_query_descriptors.pkl
|   |__ accuracy_results.csv
|   |__ logs/
|       |__ log__err_output__<workflow_step>__yyyy-mm-dd_hh-mm-ss.log
|       |__ log__std_output__<workflow_step>__yyyy-mm-dd_hh-mm-ss.log
|       |__ ...
|
|__ reference_dir/
|   |__ metadata_reference.csv
|   |__ giraffes_reference_descriptors.pkl
|
|__ processed_images/
|   |__ original_size/
|       |__ image1_cropped_torso.jpg
|       |__ image2_cropped_torso.jpg
|       |__ ...
|   |__ zoomed_version/
|       |__ image1_cropped_torso_zoomed.jpg
|       |__ image2_cropped_torso_zoomed.jpg
|       |__ ...

```

#### **Main Directory**  
- **`data_root_directory/`**
  This directory serves as the central hub for all project-related data, including models, processed images, metadata, and logs. By default, it is mapped to a blob storage account using the script `code_directory/mount_blob_gen2.sh`. However, it can also be configured to any local directory by specifying the path in the `.env` file.


#### **Subdirectory | models**

- **`data_root_directory/models/`**  
   Contains the pretrained giraffe torso detection models, configuration files, and model weights.  
   - **`data_root_directory/models/Base-RCNN-FPN.yaml`**: A base configuration for the RCNN model.  
   - **`data_root_directory/models/faster_rcnn_R_101_FPN_3x.yaml`**: Configuration for Faster R-CNN using ResNet-101 with an FPN.  
   - **`data_root_directory/models/mask_rcnn_R_50_FPN_3x.yaml`**: Configuration for Mask R-CNN with ResNet-50 and FPN.  
   - **`data_root_directory/models/model_final_torso_detection.pth`**: Final trained model weights for torso detection task.  
   - **`data_root_directory/models/model_initial_torso_detection.pkl`**: A faster_rcnn_R_101_FPN_3x model used for initialization.
   - **`data_root_directory/models/model_final_f10217_segmentation.pkl`**: A mask model used for giraffe segmentation.
   - **`data_root_directory/models/config.yaml`**: Final config file for trained model weights for torso detection task.  

#### **Subdirectory | query_images**

- **`data_root_directory/query_images/`**  
   Contains query image files to be used for running the pipeline. The directory name is flexible as the file paths are stored in `data_root_directory/query_dir/metadata_query.csv` relative to the root directory.  

#### **Subdirectory | processed_images**

- **`data_root_directory/processed_images/`**  
   Contains images processed by the vision model. Organized into two subdirectories:  
   - **`data_root_directory/processed_images/original_size/`**: Images cropped to the giraffe torso, retaining their original resolution.  
   - **`data_root_directory/processed_images/zoomed_version/`**: Images cropped and zoomed in on the giraffe torso for better visibility.  

#### **Subdirectory | reference_dir**

- **`data_root_directory/reference_dir/`**  
   Contains metadata and descriptors for the reference dataset used for matching against query images.  
   - **`data_root_directory/reference_dir/metadata_reference.csv`**: Metadata file with columns for image paths, giraffe IDs, and serial numbers.  
   - **`data_root_directory/reference_dir/giraffes_reference_descriptors.pkl`**: Contains descriptors for giraffe torso images in the reference dataset.  

#### **Subdirectory | query_dir**

- **`data_root_directory/query_dir/`**  
   Contains metadata and descriptors for the query dataset as well as logs and accuracy results.  
   - **`data_root_directory/query_dir/metadata_query.csv`**: Metadata file for query images, with paths relative to the root directory. Optionally includes a `"AID2021"` column for ground truth labels.  
   - **`data_root_directory/query_dir/giraffes_query_descriptors.pkl`**: Contains descriptors for cropped giraffe torso images in the query dataset.  
   - **`data_root_directory/query_dir/accuracy_results.csv`**: Contains accuracy metrics computed if ground truth data is available.  

- **`data_root_directory/query_dir/logs/`**  
   Stores log files for each workflow step.  
   - **`data_root_directory/query_dir/logs/log__err_output__<workflow_step>__yyyy-mm-dd_hh-mm-ss.log`**: Captures errors encountered during script execution.  
   - **`data_root_directory/query_dir/logs/log__std_output__<workflow_step>__yyyy-mm-dd_hh-mm-ss.log`**: Captures standard output, including runtime details and memory profiling.  


#### **Key Data Files**

- **`data_root_directory/reference_dir/metadata_reference.csv`**  
  Metadata for the reference dataset, with columns:  
  - `"path_relative_to_root"`: Relative path to the image.  
  - `"AID2021"`: Unique giraffe ID.  
  - `"#Serial"`: Serial number for the giraffe image.  

- **`data_root_directory/reference_dir/giraffes_reference_descriptors.pkl`**  
  Stores descriptors for the reference dataset. Format:  
  ```python
  dict[label_id] = ([serial_id_1, ..., serial_id_m], [descriptors_id_1, ..., descriptors_id_m])
  ```  

- **`data_root_directory/query_dir/metadata_query.csv`**  
  Metadata for the query dataset, with columns:  
  - `"path_relative_to_root"`: Relative path to the image.  
  - `"AID2021"` (optional): Ground truth labels for accuracy evaluation.  

- **`data_root_directory/query_dir/giraffes_query_descriptors.pkl`**  
  Stores descriptors for the query dataset. Format:  
  ```python
  dict[image_filename] = image_descriptors
  ```  

- **`data_root_directory/query_dir/accuracy_results.csv`**  
  Generated after running `code_directory/pipeline/step_5_evaluate_matching_results.py` or using the corresponding UI button. Reports accuracy metrics when ground truth data is available in `data_root_directory/query_dir/metadata_query.csv`.  

- **Log Files**:  
  - **`data_root_directory/query_dir/logs/log__err_output__<workflow_step>__yyyy-mm-dd_hh-mm-ss.log`**: Logs errors for a specific workflow step.  
  - **`data_root_directory/query_dir/logs/log__std_output__<workflow_step>__yyyy-mm-dd_hh-mm-ss.log`**: Logs standard output for a specific workflow step.  


## **Software Dependencies**

Set up the environment by creating a new conda environment and run:
```
conda create -n giraffe python=3.9 -y
conda activate giraffe
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## **How to Train and Use Giraffe Torso Detection Model?**
To train a torso detection model, we used original and cropped images of giraffes to create annotations for an object detection task. The model was fine-tuned to detect giraffe torsos by splitting the data into training, validation, and test sets.

## **How to Process a Labeled Batch of Images to be Used as Reference for Matching?**

To create a reference dataset of labeled giraffe images for comparison with query images, follow these steps:

1. **Create a Metadata Table** 
    Provide a `metadata_reference.csv` file containing metadata such as label IDs and image paths. Each row corresponds to a giraffe image. The expected columns in the CSV file are:  
    `"path_relative_to_root", "AID2021", "#Serial"`.

2. **Process Images to Crop Torso, Remove Background and Save**  
   Preprocess the images by removing the background and cropping torso to prepare for next steps.

3. **Generate Image Descriptors**  
   Extract key points and descriptors for each image. `partition_vision` should be set to `reference` in `code_directory/configs/config_matching.py`.


## **How to Process a Batch of Images to be Used as Query for Matching against Reference Data?**

### **Step 1: Upload a New Batch of Images and Reference Catalog**
Set up a local directory for storing datasets or use Azure Storage Explorer to upload new images to the mounted storage account. For local storage, define the directory path in the `.env` file; for mounted storage, use `\mnt\`. Existing data can be retained, as query images are processed based on their filenames and paths (relative to the root directory) as listed in the `metadata_query.csv` file.


### **Step 2: Set up the `.env` File**
```bash
# .env Configuration File  
# Define environment variables for storage and data management  

# Name of the container in the storage account  
container_name = "your-container-name"  

# Name of the storage account  
storage_account_name = "your-storage-account-name"  

# Storage mount type (e.g., 'adls' for Azure Data Lake Storage)  
mount_type = "your-mount-type"  

# Application ID for authentication (if required)  
app_id = "your-app-id"  

# Absolute path to the root data directory (mounted or local)  
data_root_abs_path = "/your/data/root/path/"  
```

### **Step 3: Create a Metadata Table**
Create a `metadata_query.csv` file with at least one mandatory column, `"path_relative_to_root"`, which specifies the paths of the images relative to the root directory, and one optional column, `"AID2021"`, which stores ground truth labels for testing and accuracy metrics. The `metadata_query.csv` file is updated at various stages to monitor results. If running multiple tests with different `metadata_query.csv` files, **do not overwrite existing files** directly using Azure Storage Explorer. Delete the old file before uploading a new one to avoid synchronization issues between the storage and the virtual machine (VM).


### **Step 4: Execute the Program Using the User Interface**
You can execute the AI pipeline either stage-by-stage or via the user interface (UI). `partition_vision` should be set to  `query` in `code_directory/configs/config_matching.py` when running codes to create SIFT descriptors.

Access the application by running:  
```bash
streamlit run app.py
```
Alternatively, turn on the VM and navigate to the following link (ensure your IP is added to the network security settings):  
[AI Tool User Interface](http://giraffetrack.northeurope.cloudapp.azure.com:8088/)  

**Important Notes:**  
- During the visualization and validation step, you can record actions (approve/reject results). Always save and back up the `metadata_query.csv` file before using the restart button, as it may erase human input columns for a fresh start.  
- Match results are visualized once they are generated.

Check the saved logs for error messages and standard outputs.



### **Step 5: Monitor and Export Results**
After running each stage, two log files are generated to provide insights into performance, outputs, and errors. The `metadata_query.csv` and `metadata_reference.csv` files are refreshed every 1,000 queries, enabling progress tracking.

**Tips for Monitoring Execution:**  
- Avoid opening log files before a job finishes, as this may interrupt execution.  
- To confirm if execution is complete, monitor memory and CPU usage in the Azure portal for the VM.

## **Default Hyperparameters and Configuration Settings**
The following hyperparameters are set by default in the configuration files for matching algorithms. These can be adjusted to optimize performance based on your use case or desired results.

1. **faiss_distance_cutoff_re_id** and **faiss_mode_cutoff_re_id**: Control the re-identification algorithms to accept or reject a match.
   - faiss_distance_cutoff_re_id (`inf`): Sets the maximum distance for retrieving nearest neighbors. With `inf`, no distance-based filtering is applied. 
   - faiss_mode_cutoff_re_id (`10`): After distance filtering, only key points occurring at least 10 times are considered. The match with the highest number of such key points is selected as the best match.
  
2. **faiss_distance_cutoff** and **faiss_mode_cutoff**: Control the new items partitioning process.
   - faiss_distance_cutoff (`0.062`): Sets the maximum distance for retrieving nearest neighbors.
   - faiss_mode_cutoff (`4`): After distance filtering, only key points occurring 
   - At least 4 times are considered. The match with the highest number of such key points is selected as the best match.

3. **num_recommended_ids** (`3`): This parameter controls how many IDs are recommended by the system after the comparison.

4. **cropped_img_size** (`512`): This parameter defines the size of the images after cropping before they are fed into SIFT model.
  
5. **n_features** (`1500`): This parameter defines the maximum number of key points found for images when SIFT model applies.


## **Updates in Query Metadata File as Pipeline Progresses**
The `metadata_query.csv` file contains various columns that track the different stages of the pipeline. Each column represents the results from different step as follows:

### Columns added after applying object detection models
- **ai_found_torso**: Indicates whether the giraffe's torso was detected.
- **giraffes_count**: Represents the number of giraffes detected in the image.
- **detection_coverage**: The proportion of the image covered by detected giraffe(s).
- **segmentation_coverage**: The proportion of the giraffe(s) covered by the segmentation mask.
- **combined_coverage**: A combined metric of detection and segmentation coverage.

### Columns added after creating SIFT key points and descriptors 
- **descriptors_size**: Indicates the size of the descriptors found using SIFT.

### Columns added after running re-identification matching solution
- **matching_attempt**: Indicates whether a matching attempt was made.
- **matching_status**: Shows whether a giraffe has been found in the reference dataset. If no match is found, the entry is marked as a new giraffe.
- **matched_img_serial_1**: The serial number of the first matched image.
- **matched_label_1**: The label of the first matched image.
- **matching_mean_dist_1**: The mean distance for the first match.
- **matched_img_serial_2**: The serial number of the second matched image.
- **matched_label_2**: The label of the second matched image.
- **matching_mean_dist_2**: The mean distance for the second match.
- **matched_img_serial_3**: The serial number of the third matched image.
- **matched_label_3**: The label of the third matched image.
- **matching_mean_dist_3**: The mean distance for the third match.

### Columns added after partitioning unknown items
- **database_update_status**: Indicates whether row has been processed based on `human_input` column for validation purposes, you can accept all model results and populate `human_input` column.
- **new_id_aligned_with_ref**: Shows all the new ids assigned that are aligned with reference database and can beused for updating.
  
### Columns added after evaluating accuracy metrics when labels available
- **AID2021**: The ground truth or reference dataset used for comparison during accuracy computation. This is an optional column.
- **out_of_sample**: A computed column that becomes available when the `AID2021` column is present. It indicates whether the item's label in query has been availble in reference data or not.
  
### Columns added after expert reviews results and provide feedback
These columns record the human intervention stage. By setting `auto_accept_model_matching_results` equal to True in `code_directory/configs/config_matching.py`, you can accept all the model outputs automatically.
- **human_input**: Indicates whether the human reviewer has accepted or rejected the AI results.

### Columns added after updating reference database with processd query images
- **final_update_status**: Indicates the update status of the reference database.
- **reference_pkl_file**: The updated reference `.pkl` file used for future matching.
- **metadata_reference.csv**: The updated `metadata_reference.csv` file, which includes new matching results and updates to existing entries.
  
## **Licensing**  
   
This project is licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for more details.  
